[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: So how
does a layperson become
a medical expert on Dr. Oz?
Journalist Max
Lugavere has done it
based on a passion for
learning and a passion
to help his mother diagnosed
with dementia at a young age.
His mission, how do we stop
our brain from degenerating?
Welcome to the show!
This is a little more
humble than Dr. Oz's set.
No live audience.
None of that.
>>MAX LUGAVERE: But I love it.
>>REGINA: Just you and me.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
The crystal's a nice touch.
>>REGINA: I know.
You won't see that, probably,
in the other studio, I'm sure.
>>LUGAVERE: I feel
like it's giving me
positive vibes for
this interview.
>>REGINA: It is.
>>LUGAVERE: I'm excited.
>>REGINA: So, tell us, first
of all, about your background.
The whole thing
is this came about
and, obviously, you have
that telegenic appeal.
You had already been
involved in journalism,
so you were, kind of,
primed to be able to take
a message forward, so to speak.
So, let's talk a little bit
about your background in media,
with television
journalism and so forth,
before you became
involved in this issue.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
Well, you hit the
nail on the head.
So, my background is as
a TV host and journalist
doing things not too
dissimilar to what
you're doing with the show.
My show is on a network
called Current TV that
existed between--
>>REGINA: Yeah, I remember that.
Wasn't that Al Gore's?
>>LUGAVERE: It was Al Gore's
TV network between the years
of 2005 and 2011.
It was my first
job out of college.
>>REGINA: It was a nice
millennial, kind of,
network doing popular
issues of the day.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
I mean, I was just
out of college,
super green, but excited to
really empower young people,
fellow young people, to
take the reins of media
and democratize a medium
that had long been closed off
to young people.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I
thought it was great.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
And so I did that for five to
six years wearing many hats
at the network.
You know, they hired me
because I was always, sort of,
a one man band storyteller.
In college, I majored
in psychology and film.
And I was really dedicated to
telling stories my own way.
With the lowering price of
technology, at the time,
and the democratization
of media,
I didn't really know what I
wanted to do when I graduated.
But I knew that I wanted
to do something that
made an impact on the world.
I was, in college, really
obsessed with Krishnamurti.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: And you
know, I just really felt
like I wanted to do something
that, at the same time,
entertained people
and inspired people,
but made them a little bit
smarter than they were before.
And so Current TV
was this amazing job
where I got to cover really
hard hitting journalism.
But then, really,
sort of, light topics
at the same time
because I like it all.
You know, I was a generalist.
And I'm a well-rounded person.
You know, I contain multitudes.
And so Current TV really
gave me the ability
to explore the breadth
of my interests.
It also allowed me
to explore projects
that I was passionate about.
So, I've always had a
lifelong passion in health,
and wellness, and fitness just
as an aside, just something
that I was really interested in.
This is because,
as a high schooler,
I was always terrible at sports.
But I gravitated towards
computer programming.
And when I discovered
exercise, something
clicked in my brain where I
really started to see exercise,
and supplements, and the
foods that I was eating
as software for the human body.
And so, at Current, I was
really interested in spreading
this message that
food is information,
and technology is
really coming to a point
where it's empowering health
in unprecedented ways.
And that's, sort of, what I did.
And you know, it was amazing.
I learned a lot.
I got to work with Peabody
Award winning journalists.
You know, there was really
no better job for somebody
who was really
cutting his teeth in--
>>REGINA: No, it's ideal.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah,
in storytelling.
When I left Current TV,
the network ultimately
didn't succeed, unfortunately.
Viewership plateaued
and there are probably
a million reasons for that.
But I left, sort of, having
my fill as a storyteller.
So, as I was in this
gray area living in L.A,
living the young, Hollywood,
quasi, glamorous life
that being on TV entails, I
would touch base with my mom
frequently because I'm
very close with my mom.
And she lived back in
New York at the time.
Still does.
And she started to complain
to me about brain fog.
You know, it was, I guess, 2011.
And I kind of
chalked up what she
was telling me to just aging.
>>REGINA: How old
was she at the time?
>>LUGAVERE: She was
in her late 50s.
>>REGINA: Right.
A little young for that
to be happening but yeah.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, young.
I mean, vibrant.
She had just, basically,
retired from running
a very successful business.
And you know, my
mom's a New Yorker.
New Yorkers walk fast.
They talk fast.
They tend to be
passionate about things.
And so this was a
pretty unexpected thing,
and especially because I
had no prior family history
of any kind of dementia.
In fact, my maternal
grandmother-- my mom's mom--
was in her 90s at the time
and was, cognitively, sharp
as a tack.
So I was completely caught
off guard, and confused
and, ultimately, I
wasn't even very alarmed
because I just kind of thought
that it was just something
that was par for the course.
>>REGINA: The normal process.
>>LUGAVERE: Of aging, yeah.
So, in this, sort of, downtime
where I was in between jobs,
I would spend more and more
time in New York catching up
with her and my two
brothers that live there.
And we started to notice that
something in my mom's gait,
the way that she
walked, changed.
Her stride shortened.
And it also seemed as if her
processing speed in her brain
had been reduced.
So I would always look forward
to a home cooked meal, right,
when I went back to New York
and I would be with my mom.
I'd help her cook many
times because I've always
been a foodie.
And I've always been very health
conscious, as I mentioned.
So I'd always be in the kitchen
with her trying to make sure
that she was using healthy
products, and foods,
and things like that.
You know, never white
pasta, only whole wheat.
I was sort of like the little
health lobbyist in the family
for as long as I can remember.
And I would notice
on these occasions
when I would start to
come back to New York
and spend more time
with her that it
seemed as if her processing
speed had been reduced.
Almost like when you
play a video in a web
browser with too many
open tabs, there's
like a stuttering frame rate.
I would be in the
kitchen with her,
and I would ask her for
salt, which would be--
for any person-- it
would just be a quick,
like, you receive
the information,
you reach up into the cabinet,
grab salt, and pass it
to the person asking.
It would take her
a few extra seconds
to process that to the point
where it would be quicker,
even if I was standing
across the kitchen,
for me to go and grab it myself.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: And yeah, we all
knew something was wrong.
And she had a few appointments
with neurologists,
but there was no diagnosis.
It was very unclear as
to what was going on.
And everything
seemed to culminate.
One weekend we were
in Miami, the family.
My parents were divorced.
But once a year, my mom
and dad would get together.
And the family would
take a vacation to Miami
where my dad lives, and
we'd crash at his house.
It had been a pretty nice way
for us all to get together.
And I remember that,
on this occasion,
she was standing in
my dad's kitchen.
And she announced to
the family that she
had been having memory problems
and was seeing a neurologist.
Again, we didn't
think that there
was anything major going on.
And so my dad who is even
less privy to this information
than me and my brothers jokingly
mocked what my mom was saying.
Not in any malicious
way, but just
because we were genuinely--
we were all ignorant.
And my dad said something
to the effect of,
if you're having memory
problems, what year is it?
And my mom couldn't
recall the year.
And me and my
brothers chimed in.
We were like, come on, mom.
How could you not know the year?
And it was evident on her face
that she was really struggling,
and she started crying.
And that, to me,
was like, you know,
when the 6 Train is shuffling
into the Union Square Station,
and the breaks come on, and
it's screeching to a halt.
That's sort of what I
experienced in my head
at the time.
You know, there was life
as I had known it before.
And there was what was going
to become my new reality.
I knew that I had to
move back to New York,
or at least spend more
time there, and get
to the bottom of what
my mom was experiencing.
So, you know, we ended up
booking a trip to the Cleveland
Clinic because there--
this was before I had any
concept of functional medicine.
So functional medicine is this
new style of medical treatment
where they, basically, look
at the whole system as opposed
to just treating a symptom.
Before I had any
concept of that,
I had heard that
the Cleveland Clinic
was known for taking a,
sort of, team approach.
You know, they get a
neurologist in the room.
They get a cardiologist
in the room.
They get an endocrinologist
in the room,
and they figure out
what's going on.
So, we took my mom
there for that reason.
And it was there that
my mom was diagnosed
with a neurodegenerative
disease.
She was prescribed medications
for Parkinson's disease
and Alzheimer's disease.
And that was the
first time in my life
that I had a panic attack.
>>REGINA: That's hard.
When you're close to your
mom and you're still young.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: You
know, your world is
altered if there's
something that's
going down there that's a
road that you don't recognize,
and she doesn't either.
So I think every
mom, and every son,
and child can understand
how that happens.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: You're still
inextricably intertwined.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And based on old
patterns of good health.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
And my mom is really young, and
blonde, and funny personality.
You know, she does not look
like the picture of somebody
who is succumbing to
the ravages of aging.
>>REGINA: So, after this
train hit you, so to speak,
something flicked
on in your own brain
that you were going to make this
your mission to understand it.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Right?
So, after the initial
trauma subsided,
I realized that I have something
that very few people have,
and that is media credentials.
I'm verified on Twitter.
Verified on Facebook.
I can access people that
very few people can access.
I had a blogger
account on Psychology
Today because I studied
psychology in college,
and I've always really been
interested in psychology.
I had a Blogger account
on the Huffington Post.
So I've, basically,
set my life up
in a way where I have platforms
to reach out to people should
I ever become
interested in something.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: In one fell
swoop, all of my passions
fell to the wayside
with the exception
of trying to figure out what
was happening to my mom.
And I used my
access to reach out
to scientists and researchers.
I began reading
research on PubMed.
You know, we live in
an incredible time
now where all
scientific knowledge
is available on the
internet for anybody.
It's in my pocket 24 hours
a day, at my fingertips.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: Not every research
study is fully available,
but there are abstract.
I mean, there's a lot of
really amazing information
that you could learn.
You could become an expert in,
pretty much, anything today.
The fact that I wasn't
a medical doctor
did not give me any
pause whatsoever.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: I just
rolled up my sleeves,
and I was like, I'm
going to learn everything
that I can about the
impact of nutrition
and lifestyle on brain health.
On the one hand, it
became about my mom.
Is there anything
that I could do
to help my mom improve
her symptoms as an adjunct
to the medications, which
five seconds after googling,
you realize the medications have
no disease modifying ability.
They don't alter
disease progression.
And there's a funny line.
It's not funny.
It's actually kind of sad.
There's a medical
school joke about how
neurologists approach cases.
And they say that neurologists
don't treat disease,
they admire it.
And that's because there
are no good medications
for these diseases.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: So, I
just became obsessed.
And I also, on the other
hand, which is something
that, intuitively, it struck me
as something really important,
was to focus on prevention
because I learned that changes
begin in the brain decades
before the first symptom
of memory loss.
Nobody was talking
about it at the time.
I had no mentor to look up to.
But I was like,
you know, I assumed
that if I were to take
all of these insights
that I was learning about how
to properly nourish a brain
and apply them to
myself, then maybe I
would have a chance
of not developing
the mental monstrosity
that my mom developed.
And what I learned,
really, was striking.
There's a wide body of
research out there really
clearly elucidating
that our choices matter
when it comes to not only
our cognitive health,
but our cognitive function.
And as soon as I started
putting these things that I
was learning into
practice in my own life,
I felt almost from
one day to the next,
that my brain started
working better too.
>>REGINA: So now, by
this time, first of all,
in the very early
parts of your search,
your grandma lived
to be 96, right?
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And she did not
have any of these issues.
>>LUGAVERE: Right.
>>REGINA: Your mother did.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Did you look into
the notion of how much of it
is genetic, for example?
And did you make any
discoveries in that area
as to what science,
as it is, which
is malnourished itself, right--
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: --understood
stood to be
genetic versus environmental
toxicities and so forth.
I mean because that's one
question people wonder.
Well how come it didn't
happen to your grandma,
but it did happen your mom?
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
So, what changed, right, between
my grandmother's generation
and my mom's that led to
my mom developing dementia
and my grandmother not?
I mean, you would
assume that they share,
at least, some genes
in common, right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: So, the most well
defined Alzheimer's risk gene
is called the APOE4 allele.
And one in four people have it.
So this is a very common gene.
Polymorphism,
which is out there.
Basically, one in four
people that are watching
carry and increased genetic
risk for this disease.
>>REGINA: What triggers it?
Or look at it from an
epigenetic point of view.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
So, what's so
critical to understand
is that we know about
the impact of this gene
on one's cognitive
health because
of correlational studies.
But there are parts in the world
where people have this gene,
and there is no increased
risk for Alzheimer's disease.
So, what is it about
the interaction
between this gene,
and our diets,
and our lifestyles
in the modern world
that's putting carriers at risk?
>>REGINA: So what did
you learn on that?
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah,
so what I learned
is that there's a lot going on.
I mean, you know,
we live in a world
and we eat foods that are
completely out of harmony
with the world in which
our brains evolved.
>>REGINA: Which
parts of the world
did you find that though
this same gene exists,
it wasn't triggered to
develop into dementia?
>>LUGAVERE: In hunter-gatherer
communities in Nigeria,
for one.
Yeah, they eat diets that--
>>REGINA: Basic paleo, kind of.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, exactly.
I mean, they eat beans.
They eat legumes and
things like that.
But they eat
dramatically less sugar.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: And they eat much
less carbohydrates, overall,
than we do.
>>REGINA: And a lot
more proteins and fats.
They drink more milks,
for example, raw milks.
>>LUGAVERE: Yes.
And they eat a much
higher fiber diet.
>>REGINA: Right.
Higher fiber.
>>LUGAVERE: And we
can talk about why
fiber may act as a shield
to our brain health.
And that's through
the gut brain axis,
which is a really
new area of science.
>>REGINA: Yeah, absolutely.
>>LUGAVERE: But in
the United States,
this gene puts us
at higher risk.
There's other research--
>>REGINA: 'Cause of very refined
diet, high in carbohydrates.
>>LUGAVERE: Exactly.
Really high in processed
foods, in grains
that we've been told
for decades should
make the foundation of our
diets, which are essentially--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
that bogus pyramid.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, the
bogus food pyramid,
which, thankfully,
is now defunct.
But we still have
the my plate guide,
which says that
1/4 of every plate
should be constituted by
grains, which provide no benefit
whatsoever to us.
I mean, at best, in a healthy
body, grains are benign.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: But really, there
is no benefit to eating them.
And in fact, we know that
a very small percentage
of the population gets
adequate micro-nutrients
from their diet.
Magnesium, selenium,
iodine, things like that.
So we're not eating
the vegetables
that we know that
we should be eating
that actually do
provide benefit that we
know we've co-evolved with.
And we're now basing
a fourth of our diets
on grains, which
have only existed
in the past second of human
evolution, essentially.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
OK, so as you
started this, we're
going to go into a lot of
different constituents of it.
Some of the influences that
are out there that are popular
today that people know.
But you decided, OK, if
it's affecting your mom,
it probably took two or
three decades of whatever.
Whether it's toxicities, diet
health practices and so forth.
So, now you're
concerned not only
to hunt down the answer
for this for your mom,
but also for your own
generation to start really
from a preventative level.
And you created a documentary.
Right?
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
So yeah, we're almost
finished with my documentary,
which is called Bread Head.
It's the first ever and
only documentary focused
solely on preventing dementia.
In it, I've interviewed
all of the top researchers
in the field.
We've traveled to
the Charite Hospital
in Berlin, which is one of those
research intensive institutions
in the world.
We've traveled to the Karolinska
Institute in Stockholm, Sweden
where they've done the first
ever, large population,
long-term trial to prove
that with our diets
and our lifestyles, we
can significantly delay
the onset of cognitive decline.
I've even enrolled
myself in a study
taking place in New York City.
So I mean, we've really gone to
great length in the documentary
to have the science
be bullet proof
and to really pave a roadmap
towards dementia prevention
for young people.
>>REGINA: Why don't we take a
little quick look at the teaser
for your documentary.
OK?
>>LUGAVERE: Sure.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>>LUGAVERE: There's a clap.
This is a film about you.
This is a film about me.
This is a film
about your parents.
This is a film about
everyone we've ever
known that has a brain.
I'm Max Lugavere.
And I'm inviting you
to participate with me
in a project that I
think has the potential
to do a lot of good
for a lot of people.
It's a documentary
film that's going
to pose the question, what if
America's most feared disease
is a choice that we
make at checkout?
>> About 5.2 million people in
the US had Alzheimer's in 2014.
And that number is expected
to, roughly, triple by 2050.
>>LUGAVERE: This is my mom.
Her name is Kathy.
How do you feel?
>> Pretty good.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah?
About three years
ago, she started
showing signs of cognitive
difficulty and memory loss.
>> Anything you want to know?
>>LUGAVERE: Where
are you right now?
>> In our rental apartment.
>>LUGAVERE: No, no, no.
Be serious.
>> I am.
>>LUGAVERE: It was
definitely traumatic
coming to terms with the
idea that my mom could
have some kind of
neurodegenerative disease.
Because I have no prior
family history of dementia,
it sent me down the rabbit
hole to figure out ways
that I could not only help her
but also prevent future memory
loss for myself, as well.
We are heading to Providence,
Rhode Island where we are going
to meet Susan de la Monte.
Who is one of the top neuro
pathologists in the world.
I read articles that posited
this idea of Alzheimer's being
type 3 diabetes.
A form of diabetes of the brain.
That struck me as being a really
powerful idea because we know
why people become diabetic.
You're credited as having
coined the term type 3 diabetes.
Do you think that diabetes type
3 is an accurate description
of Alzheimer's disease?
>>SUSAN DE LA MONTE: I think
it's a great description.
When we first saw
the phenomenon,
we started making a list of
what happens in diabetes,
what happens in the brain?
And you go down the
list, everything's there?
>>LUGAVERE: Just a
few short months ago,
one of the most prestigious
medical journals in the world
said that one in three
Alzheimer's cases
may be preventable.
>>ALESSIO FASANO: We're talking
about the shift of paradigm
here.
Some genes may put you at
risk for Alzheimer's there.
But the fact that there is
no destiny that you develop
Alzheimer's.
>>LUGAVERE: Changes in
the brain begins 30 years
before the first symptom.
So that's why I'm here
shooting this video
asking you to co-create
with me a documentary
to take a journey to the
cutting edge of neuroscience.
Along the way, we're going to
challenge some very commonly
held assumptions that
we make about what
constitutes a healthy diet.
>> We know that whole grains are
a key player in healthy eating.
>>DE LA MONTE: Six to
11 servings per day
is what we need.
Just like the gasoline
for the human body.
>>LUGAVERE: All to
figure out whether or not
America's most feared disease
is inevitable or avoidable based
on choices that we make.
If you know anybody
who's been touched
by any kind of
neurodegenerative disease,
share this campaign with
them, and please contribute
because neurodegenerative
diseases
truly rob us of the
essence of who we are.
And yet, they don't have
>> I do.
[LAUGHING]
>>LUGAVERE: There's
truly nothing
more powerful than an
idea whose time has come.
So help me make this film.
Co-create it with me.
Let's spread the
message far and wide.
Thanks.
>>REGINA: So actually, good job.
>>LUGAVERE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: This journey,
even for you, started young
because when you
were a little kid,
they thought you had ADHD, which
is a kind of garbage bucket
diagnosis anyway.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so,
let's talk about that.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
When I moved back to
New York to really see
what was what with
my mom, I started
spending a lot more
time in her apartment.
And my mom-- she doesn't like
to admit it-- but I think she
can be a bit of a hoarder.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LUGAVERE: She would kill me
if she heard me saying that,
but she's got a lot of stuff.
And I always find, like, really
precious family heirlooms
unearthed and just
sitting like they're
nothing on the coffee table
in front of the television.
I'm like, mom, this is
a really precious thing.
It shouldn't just be sitting out
for the cats to walk all over.
You know?
So on this particular
occasion, what I found
was a note that was
written by the resource
room of my elementary
school to my mom and my dad.
This is, obviously,
way before email.
So the physical evidence
was there, plain as day.
And what it was,
it was a counselor
at my school telling my
mom that Max is very easily
distractable, as is often
the case with people
who are intellectually gifted.
But we recommend that Max
see a counselor to really try
to figure out what's going
on with his attention.
>>REGINA: Oh, and a little
Ritalin may help too, right?
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, yeah.
I mean, thankfully, I was
never prescribed Ritalin.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LUGAVERE: But I've
always struggled
with maintaining focus on
things that I wasn't completely
consumed with.
My brain works like a switch.
You know, either I'm completely
obsessed with a topic,
or it's really hard
for me to focus on it.
And I struggled all throughout
elementary school, high school.
I don't think I've ever--
I probably shouldn't
let this be on record,
but I don't think I've ever
finished a single book that we
had to read in high school
because I've always struggled
so hard to read these books.
>>REGINA: I was the
identical profile of you.
A's in anything I cared about.
A plus's and, kind
of, C-minus and D just
because I could ace the
test at the last moment.
On everything else,
couldn't focus.
It wasn't interesting.
>>LUGAVERE: Right.
But if you give me a
neurophysiology textbook,
I'll read it from front to back.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>LUGAVERE: And I will remember
even the most minute details.
So that's actually set me
up for what I'm doing now.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
It's the perfect personality
to do it you've taken on.
You also started writing a
book called Genius Foods.
You know, obviously,
a compilation
of a lot of what you've learned.
And then, somewhere
you were discovering
and you ended up
on Dr. Oz, right.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So, how
did that happen?
How did a layperson end up
talking about, essentially,
medical conditions on Dr. Oz?
>>LUGAVERE: That's an
amazing question, Regina.
I mean, I have really
become dedicated
to learning as much as I
can, but also using my skill
set, which is communication
and being media savvy, being
a good storyteller,
to really get
what I consider to be the
most important topic there
is out to young people
because young people--
I know because I
was this person--
young people don't
care to listen
to a doctor in a lab coat.
They also don't really
care about dementia.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: So I began
creating videos on YouTube.
I began blogging.
And ultimately, I began
writing Genius Foods,
which is what I consider
to be an owner's
manual for your brain.
Rather than tell
you about the foods
that you can't and
shouldn't eat--
we get into that too--
but Genius Foods is
all about the foods
that you really
should eat, that you
should be eating more
of on loop to optimize
your cognitive function.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>LUGAVERE: You know, they found
that dietary diversity back
for the vast majority
of our evolution
was probably a virtue.
You know, the more
nutrients, the better
when we were foragers.
Dietary diversity today
in a modern supermarket
is not a good strategy
for our health.
They found that
people that abide
by the eat everything
in moderation rule
actually use that as an
excuse to eat more junk foods.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: Like sodas and
confectionery products,
pastries, and things like that.
>>REGINA: Basically,
it's like, it's all good.
Just don't eat too much.
>>LUGAVERE: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Right.
So that advice to eat everything
in moderation is bunk.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: The
healthiest people
buy a small group of
healthy foods on loop.
And in Genius
Foods, we highlight
the specific foods that have
a strong body of evidence
to suggest that
they really boost
not only our long
term brain health
but our cognitive function
in the here and now.
>>REGINA: OK now, in that, do
you take into consideration
the individuality, such
as the metabolic typing
kind of information?
>>LUGAVERE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: OK, good.
We just want to know
so people are set up
to know what to expect when
they ultimately read your book.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
Everybody's different.
Men are different from women.
And people have different genes.
So in the book, we
go to great lengths
to really underscore
that there's
no such thing as a one size
fits all dietary approach
or supplement regimen.
So, we take the most
broadly applicable concepts.
And we also offer in
the book info boxes
allowing you to
cater those concepts
to your own unique biology.
Do you carry an APOE4 allele?
The recommendations might
not be all that different.
But if you did go
and do a gene test
and you know that you carry
this gene, for example,
you may want to consume more
extra virgin olive oil and less
butter, according to the--
>>REGINA: Omega-9s
versus saturated fats.
>>LUGAVERE: Yes.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>LUGAVERE: According to
the best available evidence,
which is constantly evolving.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah,
so I mean, again--
>>REGINA: It was a
fast evolving field.
It's really going right now.
Brain health, and understanding
dementia, and super foods.
I mean, I've interviewed so
many people in this area.
And one of the things I just
had to say in there when
people said, OK, bread
sounds suspiciously
similar to Grain Brain.
And of course, David
Perlmutter is one of the people
that you also look to in terms
of your research in that.
So let's start going into the
actual spectrum of nutrients
and how they affect the
brain from what you've
learned thus far, and
what you feel science
has discovered thus far.
And why don't we start there?
Let's go with grains.
You already mentioned
it a little bit ago.
And then, I do want to get to
Dave Asprey, whom I've also
interviewed, in Bulletproofing
Coffee in the whole set up
to because that show was popular
because people were like,
yoo hoo, I can drink three,
or four, or five cups a day
now as long as I put my
butter in it, you know,
and what you found
along that way
because some people don't
do well with coffee.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So, we'll get to him.
We'll get to a whole
bunch of these guys.
Let's start with
Perlmutter, Grain Brain,
which feeds into Bread Head.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
So, just on record, I
love David Perlmutter,
and he has been an
incredible inspiration to me.
I like to think that
my work has really
evolved past the initial
ideas that I read about
in Grain Brain and elsewhere.
But you know, there is a lot
of truth still in that book.
When you read statistics like
3/4 of US teens and adults are
either diabetic or pre-diabetic
and that diabetes is something
that develops over 10 years--
it's not something that
just pops up overnight--
you realize that
the recommendation
to add more grains to
your diet is really wrong.
It's essentially what
diabetes and pre-diabetes is,
is carbohydrate intolerance.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Did your research take
you to Mark's Daily Apple,
by any chance?
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
I love Mark Sisson.
And he's got one of the
best blogs on the internet.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
So I'm just bringing that up now
because as people are watching
this, they can start writing
down all these different sites
as well because that
turned out to be really
critical in curing diabetes is
they went to a classic paleo.
They didn't go-- a lot
of them-- as far as
ketogenic but kind of
a classic paleo diet,
and just cut out the grains.
Just that one thing.
Grains and sugar.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And it was amazing
how they were turning
their own diabetes around.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And leaving their
doctors scratching their heads.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, exactly.
If you're diabetic, you're,
again, carbohydrate intolerant.
And grains are highly
concentrated sources
of carbohydrate with
minimal nutrients, you know.
We talk about nutrient
density, how nutrient density
should really be one of the
cornerstones of your diet
of the choices that you make
when it comes to what you're
going to put into your mouth.
You want foods that are
dense in nutrients, right.
Grains are nutrient poor.
And today when less
and less people
practice recreational physical
activity than ever before,
we're eating too many carbs.
And this is particularly
problematic for vegans
because, oftentimes,
the argument
for the b-vitamins spectrum,
say, in rice, for example,
comes into the equation.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And a lot of
rice is consumed, often,
in a vegan diet.
How, for example,
do you guide people
that fall into the
category of veganism?
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
I don't think that veganism
is an optimal diet for brain
health and brain function.
According to your
moral constitution,
it might be the
right choice for you.
And I struggle
with that, as well.
But it's important to
divorce those conversations
from one another.
You know, it's like
church and state.
Our brains evolved with
diets that were omnivorous.
In fact, researchers
believe that it's
access to cooked meat, and
the pre-formed DHA and EPA
fats in the fat of
those meat products
that really catalyze the
growth of our brains.
Fish oils.
You know, pasture
raised wild animals.
Things like that.
And you know, a vegan
might say, well, I'm
supplementing with B-12, which
is the one essential nutrient
that we know that
we need that only
comes from animal products.
And they might take
their B-12 supplement
and think that they're
really checking all the boxes
for nutrient deficiencies.
But you know, there's
a whole category
of nutrients that are
not essential but are
called conditionally essential.
And these nutrients are things
that we might manufacture
to limited degrees
in our own bodies,
but not nearly enough
for good health.
So one example of that would
be a nutrient in red meat
called creatine.
Creatine was found to actually
boost the cognitive function,
the ability of the
brain to think properly,
when vegetarians
supplemented with it.
So you know, people that
are watching might be like,
OK, well, now I'm going
to go and buy creatine
on the internet.
But this is just one
nutrient that we know of
and that some
researcher somewhere was
able to find funding to study.
So the really impetus that
I have is to, sort of,
tell people that when we cross
out an entire category of food
that we surely have had for the
vast majority of the evolution
of our brains, you're
really setting yourself up
for reduced cognitive function.
>>REGINA: This is difficult.
It's a very difficult subject.
And the most, I'd
say, the greatest
preponderance of challenging
comments I get on my shows
is if you go up against
veganism because I
was a vegetarian for years,
had a vegetarian cooking show
on PBS, wrote
vegetarian cookbooks
until I became actually ill.
And then, couldn't
recover myself.
And I was constantly
chronically low on all the B
vitamins and all of
that, even though I
was taking supplementation.
So I mean, I went
through my own journey.
And I think the one
thing that, ultimately,
I began understanding just from
more of a substantive point
of view is that in
eating those things--
whether it's fish
eating plankton,
or whether it's a
cattle grazing--
you're talking about nutrient
condensation in a way
that we can't and haven't yet
learned how to manufacture
in the laboratory.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
There's no more bio available
source of iron than red meat.
And pre-menopausal women need
twice as much iron than men.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: And
there's no better--
>>REGINA: And I wasn't
eating any red meat
during any of those years.
>>LUGAVERE: And my
mom was a vegetarian.
And I'm not saying
that her meat avoidance
is what caused her dementia.
But it certainly
did not protect her.
And there's really interesting
research, actually.
So most of the meat consumed
in the United States
is of horrible quality.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>LUGAVERE: It's
animals that are raised
in deplorable conditions.
It's an animal Auschwitz
every single day.
And I, in no way, endorse--
>>REGINA: Which is why
I quit all of that.
>>LUGAVERE: The factory
farming system, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LUGAVERE: In
Australia, there is
a center at Deakin
University called
the Food and Mood Center.
And I've interviewed one of the
main researchers there named
Felice Jacka.
In Australia, people
tend to consume meat
from New Zealand, which
is, by default, grass fed.
>>REGINA: Grass fed, yeah.
>>LUGAVERE: And she
found that women
that didn't consume
the recommended
three to four servings
of red meat per week
were twice as likely
to be depressed.
And she also found that
women who consumed more
than the recommended
amount were also
more likely to be depressed.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: So the idea,
really, behind this research
is that some is better than
none, and too much is not great
either.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: So, I'm not saying
to base your diet around meat.
But I think that allowing
yourself to really eat
and nourish your brain cells--
>>REGINA: Well and also, a
body will often tell you--
your own body will tell you--
what it's desiring,
what it needs.
And we tend to, especially
if you're really, kind of,
righteously
philosophical as I have
been on many topics,
including vegetarianism,
you will override what your
body is trying to tell you.
And I think that's a big
part of this message too.
And that also includes
carbohydrates.
There are times when your
brain, for whatever reason,
is craving a shot
of carbohydrates.
And you should probably listen.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Do it in
the healthiest way you
can, but listen in that moment.
And maybe that,
more than anything,
is rather than listening to our
philosophical learned overviews
in life.
Listening to the body itself has
to be critical to this message.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
We have a moral
luxury today to say
that we're not going
to eat meat because we
can supplement with B-12.
And we can make it at a certain
point without these nutrients
and without this food.
>>REGINA: And some
people do beautifully.
People can do it.
>>LUGAVERE: People can do it.
>>REGINA: But you have
to look in the mirror.
You have to look inside.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, and there
are perfect examples
of people that seem to be
thriving on vegan diets.
Like, Rich Roll,
for example, who's
a vegan ultra-marathoner
who is in amazing shape.
I wish I was in as
good a physical shape
as he seems to be in.
>>REGINA: Wayne
Lightheart, yeah.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
But for most people, I
think it's really difficult.
And I think, again, making the
argument purely about health
really is something that I
think is important to do.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I agree.
So let's talk about gluten.
OK, so Perlmutter
would say, essentially,
that the gluten in the grain
is also seriously implicated
in Alzheimer's.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
There is very little
evidence to make
a direct connection between
gluten and Alzheimer's disease.
Very little evidence.
And that's one of
the things that I
learned early on in my journey.
But there is an impact of gluten
on the gut lining of everybody.
And it seems to be more
exacerbated in the context.
I.e., it seems to be a more
extreme impact on the gut
lining of people in the context
of the Western diet, which
is very low in fiber,
low in vegetables,
and full of industrial products
used to make processed foods.
>>REGINA: Genetically modified.
You have actual gluten added to
the products, the baked goods.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: Extra gluten.
>>LUGAVERE: Exactly.
So we're eating more gluten
than ever before, this protein
that no human can
properly digest.
And we're eating
it in the context
of a diet that is leaving our
gut bacteria pretty unhappy
because they're not getting
the fuel that they need,
which is fiber.
So, after having
just said all that
about the value of a little
bit of red meat in the diet,
I now want to
underscore how important
eating lots of
vegetables is because we
have a universe
of microorganisms
that live in our large
intestine, the colon.
And they find it to be the
Boca Raton of the human body.
I mean, they hang out there.
They luxuriate.
They basically get
what is undigested
by the small intestine,
which is fiber,
which comes from dark,
leafy greens, vegetables,
things like that.
>>REGINA: Cruciferous
vegetables, in particular.
>>LUGAVERE: Cruciferous
Avocados.
An avocado has 12
grams of dietary fiber.
I mean, who needs
Wheat Bran when
you can eat a whole avocado,
which also provides you
with so many other
nutrients that we need?
So, what's so cool, and
we go really in-depth
into this ingenious foods
about these microbes,
is that they basically
ferment the dietary fiber
that we feed them.
And they create these
chemicals, these really powerful
chemicals, called short
chain fatty acids.
The most well-studied of
which is called butyrate.
And basically, the cells
of our colons eat butyrate.
So these bacteria
literally feed the cells
of our colon, which,
in turn, produce mucus.
Now this sounds really gross.
But this mucous lining
that colonic cells make
is really important
to preventing
a breakdown of our gut
lining and from preventing
an inflammatory response
to things like gluten.
So when we're
eating a diet that's
really high in vegetables,
really high in dietary fiber,
it may give our guts a
little bit more resilience
against things that
people seem to be
really sensitive to today.
I.e, gluten and lectins,
which have been in the news.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I'm
going to ask you
about that in a minute, yeah.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
and in short chain
fatty acids, other
complexes you can
take to offset that are things
like kombucha, apple cider
vinegar.
These also fit into that same
short chain fatty acid complex.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: And it
can help reverse.
I mean, if you're
going to have a--
you know, whoopee, I want to
have a muffin this morning,
maybe have your apple
cider vinegar first.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: You know, things
like that to start off setting.
Is that what you're saying
more or less that you can?
>>LUGAVERE: Exactly, that we
can build resilience in the gut
through consuming
kombucha probiotics.
I love kombucha.
Since I've been in Boulder,
I've had some local kombucha,
which is amazing.
And eating more vegetables.
Eating dietary fiber.
So essentially, what
we want in a nutshell
is the microbiome of
a grain free vegan
who eats a little bit of meat.
You know, we don't want
the microbiome of somebody
who eats a lot of meat with
a little bit of vegetables.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: We want the
microbiome of grain free vegan
that it's meat.
>>REGINA: Right, which
makes perfect sense.
And that's, essentially,
with Mark's Daily Apple,
a lot of people say, oh, paleo.
This is terrible.
It's so much meat and fat.
And some diets-- and we're
going to go into it next,
ketogenic diets--
do require a lot of fat.
But oftentimes, this is for
a more critical condition
that the body has
found itself in.
Right?
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So,
let's go into that.
Let's go to-- I also interviewed
him, Dominic D'agostino, which
whom we both admire.
>>LUGAVERE: Yes.
>>REGINA: And the
subject of ketogenics.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
So a ketogenic diet
is basically a diet
that allows your body
to tap into its own fat
as a source of fuel.
>>REGINA: To burn
fat instead of sugar.
>>LUGAVERE: To burn fat
instead of sugar, yes.
And it's something that
our bodies are actually
quite familiar with because
we came into the world
as babies spending a lot of
time in this ketogenic state
where our brains were
burning fat instead of sugar.
Today, we chronically
deny our brains
the ability to burn fat,
which is actually a very
clean burning fuel source.
And this is because our
bodies and our brains
want to burn what we feed them
the most frequently, which
tends to be sugar,
and carbs, and grains.
>>REGINA: All results in sugar.
>>LUGAVERE: Exactly,
which below the neck,
is all the same thing.
It's all sugar.
Either they're single
molecules of sugar,
or they're chains of sugar.
They break down
instantly, even as soon
as you start chewing the starch.
If you allow a piece of white
rice to linger on your tongue,
white rice isn't sweet,
but within a few seconds,
it'll start to taste
sweet because that's
because of the amylase enzyme
that we have in our saliva that
breaks down starch immediately.
So, when we go on a diet
that's lower in carbohydrates,
and especially when
we allow ourselves
to fast occasionally
to practice something
called intermittent fasting, we
allow our bodies and our brains
to tap into our fat, which
the brain will happily
burn for fuel.
And in fact, these ketones--
and Dominic D'agostino
is so eloquent
and articulate in
his description.
>>REGINA: Watch the
interview with Dominic.
You'll like it.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, he's great.
I'm merely a curator of
a lot of the information
that he's actually published
in my medical literature
and others.
>>REGINA: It's in
the archives here.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
The brain loves to burn ketones.
And there's some evidence that
a brain with Alzheimer's disease
actually has lost its
ability to metabolize sugar.
And so, by denying it the
ability to burn ketones as fat
actually perpetuates
the disease process.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK, so now we go to lectins.
And Dr. Gundry,
right now, is kind
of the poster boy for the
lectin story at the moment.
>>LUGAVERE: Yes.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about what lectins
are, what the prevailing
story at the moment is,
and what your
research has found.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, so
lectins are plant proteins
that are, basically, like the
defense proteins in plants
that, when an animal
would consume them,
it would inflame them through
its impact on the gut.
Lectins are common in
nightshades, tomatoes, peppers,
things like that.
>>REGINA: And particularly,
the seeds and the skin, right?
>>LUGAVERE: Yes.
>>REGINA: Not so much the flesh.
>>REGINA: I found that
kind of interesting.
>>LUGAVERE: But the
problem is many lectins
are actually deactivated
through the cooking process.
And we tend not to eat seeds
of things like bell peppers
anyway.
But also, we want to be as
robust an organism as we can.
And some of the most
important compounds
that we consume when we
eat vegetables are actually
in a similar category of
being plant defense compounds.
So polyphenols are
very common in plants.
They're one of the reasons
why extra virgin olive oil is
so good for.
Blueberries, dark chocolate,
are rich in polyphenols.
Polyphenols are actually good
for us because, in a way,
they're bad for us.
They actually stimulate our
body's own antioxidant defense
chemicals.
So you know, I
think if we're going
to have a conversation
about plant products
that are not good for us--
I mean, polyphenols are,
technically, not good for us.
In really high amounts,
they may be toxic.
Whereas, in small amounts,
they compel our bodies
to adapt and grow stronger.
>>REGINA: Almost
like an immunization.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
I think for somebody with an
active autoimmune disease,
it's worth eliminating lectins.
But again, for most people, I
think a lot of the sensitivity
that clinicians see
is due to the fact
that we've ultimately lost
resilience in the gut.
We're not eating
enough dietary fiber
allowing these compounds
to get closer and closer
to our own immune system.
And that's something that really
shouldn't be the case if we're
eating lots of fiber, and
we have a robust microbiome
and a robust mucus layer.
I mean, do I eat foods
that contain lectins?
Yes, I eat tomatoes,
and I eat bell peppers
because I think the benefits
probably outweigh the risks.
>>REGINA: OK.
Let's talk about
essential fatty acids.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And the sourcing
of essential fatty
acids, whether it be Udo's
oil, which is all vegan based,
or whether it's a
Nordic fish oil.
Let's talk about the
quality, the effectiveness,
and what you've learned.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, so
omega 3s and omega 6s
are essential fatty acids.
And they're essential because we
don't make them in our bodies.
We have to get them from food.
That doesn't mean that you
have to eat a lot of them.
That just means that we need to
get some so that our brains can
use them as building
blocks, and so
that we can have a healthy
inflammatory response
in the body.
The kinds of omega 3s that
are present in the diet
are pre-formed EPA and DHA.
So EPA fat is anti-inflammatory.
DHA is one of the most
important building
blocks of a healthy brain.
Those are found in the fat
of fatty fish, grass fed
beef, pasteurized
eggs, things like that.
The other omega 3 fat that
is pretty common in diet
comes from plants.
Chia seeds.
Flaxseeds.
Walnuts.
The problem is that
humans are very
poor at converting
the omega 3 fats found
in plants to their
usable forms in the body.
Women are about twice
as good at it as men.
But your average
dude can eat lots
of plant based omega
3s in the form of ALA,
and see a negligible increase
in DHA and EPA in their bodies.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: It's
thought that women
are better at this conversion
to facilitate childbearing.
But in general, what you
want are pre-formed fat.
So if you are vegan, algal oil
I think is a good substitute.
But in general, I try
to eat fatty fish two
to three times per week.
I supplement with
high quality fish oil.
And I also avoid
grain and seed oils,
like canola, corn, and
soy oil because they
can pervert the balance.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Yeah, and a lot of those also
start skewing, like safflower.
And a lot of the
common oil starts
skewing the balance
between the 6s and the 3s
where you're overloaded in 6s.
If you eat a lot of baked goods
that are commercially made,
you're getting a ton of omega
6s out of balance to the 3s.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
So this kind of fat is
called polyunsaturated fats.
And they were really
present in the diet
and trace quantities for the
vast majority of our evolution
up until about 100 years ago.
And now they make up 10%
to 20% of our calories.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>LUGAVERE: In the
form of canola oil,
corn oil, and things like that.
So these fats are really
important for the brain.
And in fact, again,
omega 6's are not bad.
They're essential.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LUGAVERE: And a
healthy human brain
has both omega 3s and omega 6s.
>>REGINA: It has to be in
the right proportion though.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah, in a
comparable proportion.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE:
Interestingly, if you
take the polyunsaturated fat
content of a piece of grass fed
beef, it mirrors that of
a healthy human brain.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Another piece we
haven't talked about--
this is just, kind
of, a quickie note,
is choline content in
egg yolks, for example,
which is really an essential
nutrient to the brain in brain
function.
>>LUGAVERE: Exactly.
So before, we were talking
about nutrients that
are conditionally essential.
Choline, as you mentioned,
is the perfect example
of a conditionally
essential amino acids.
So what that means,
again, is that we
make a little bit of
choline in our bodies,
but not enough for good health.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: And most
people consume not
nearly enough choline, which
is abundant in egg yolk.
I mean, an egg yolk provides
your daily requirement
for choline.
Whereas, you'd need
to eat, I think,
something like five
cups of brussels
sprouts every single day to
get the same amount of choline
as found in one egg yolk.
>>REGINA: Again, that
condensation of nutrients.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah
>>LUGAVERE: And colon is
really important as a precursor
to acetylcholine, which is
a neurotransmitter that's
really important in
learning and memory.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LUGAVERE: In fact, patients
with Alzheimer's disease,
or any kind of
dementia really, take
drugs to boost levels of
acetylcholine in the brain.
>>REGINA: You have
an egg for breakfast,
ideally, where the yolk is not
cooked and the white is cooked.
I mean, a soft-boiled
egg is, kind of,
your classic for the
best consumption of that.
>>LUGAVERE: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK, we already talked about
probiotics a little bit ago.
And we've talked about
protein consumption.
I want to go into the whole
bullet proof story in coffee.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
So I'm a fan of coffee.
I'm a big fan of coffee.
And the research really seems
to show that it's protective.
It's anti-inflammatory.
It's America's number one
source of polyphenols,
these little compounds that
actually tell our bodies to--
>>REGINA: But like you say, you
can have only so many of those
before you start tipping over.
Right?
>>LUGAVERE: Well, yeah.
So, there is person-to-person
variability in our ability
to metabolize caffeine.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: Generally,
you want to make sure
that you're consuming coffee
before 2:00 PM, maybe 3:00 PM,
so as not to affect your sleep.
But there is pretty
good evidence
to suggest that coffee is
protective against, both,
Parkinson's disease and
Alzheimer's disease.
>>REGINA: And it is interesting
when you're bringing it up.
That way you're looking,
again, if we go back
to metabolic typing.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Right?
The general rule of thumb is
if a slow metabolizer, which
are more comfortable with a
vegan or vegetarian any way
diet, which need lower
proteins and lower fats,
and more vegetables
and carbohydrates,
can consume coffee just
straight up a little bit more
effectively without any
detrimental effects.
Whereas, a fast metabolizer that
needs more fats and proteins
in their diet needs the
accompaniment of even heavy
cream, which is a big part
of that story with Dave
[? Asbury ? ] is
butter, in fact.
Heavy cream to ameliorate
some of the insulin producing
effects of it and can do it OK.
So again, it's all in balance
and so highly individual.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Right?
I mean, adding
fat to your coffee
is going to slow the
release of caffeine.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>LUGAVERE: Adding
fat to anything
slows gastric emptying,
which is basically
the emptying of the
contents of your stomach
into your small intestine.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: So, any time
you add fat to something,
that process is going
to become slower.
And that can make for a more
pleasant coffee drinking
experience because you don't
get the caffeine surge.
I have a lot of
respect for Dave.
I use MCT oil.
He has a product that's
similar to MCT oil called
brain octane, which
I use which is
part of the bulletproof
coffee concoction.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: I don't
think that there's
any necessity for adding
more butter to the diet.
That said, I do enjoy
bulletproof coffee,
and I will drink it.
But I don't make the
recommendation to people
to add more butter to their
diet necessarily because, again,
going back to genes,
every nutrient is so--
whether or not it's good
for you or bad for you
is so context dependent.
>>REGINA: It is.
>>LUGAVERE: What
else are you eating?
What are your genes like?
>>REGINA: It is.
And the quality of
the source itself.
So, if you go then swing
over to Dr. Mercola's side,
he'll say, yeah, go for it.
Drink coffee, but make sure
it doesn't have mold on it.
So, his is the mold
free coffee story.
Other people will say, no, shade
grown, organic, high altitude
coffee only.
Low acidic coffee.
Everyone has a
story, but every body
is going to respond to
these coffees differently.
>>LUGAVERE: Exactly.
So I mean, that's like
the beautiful thing
about the internet
is that there's now
this plurality of voices.
And you know, there's a
lot of people who are like,
well, this worked
for me, so I'm going
to make it sound like it's
going to work for you.
But I think my
passion really has
been to help people
get to the truth,
and to help people realize
that everybody is different.
And there is a lot of truth
that's out there, you know.
>>REGINA: There is.
There's a lot.
And there's a lot of
conflicting information.
And you have to start
developing discernment yourself.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And I wanted to add
one little thing because I
have a step mom
who is very, very
advanced in terms of dementia.
And now she doesn't really
know who any of us are.
She kind of remembers
who my father is.
And she's still at home.
He loves her dearly, and he
wants to take care of her
as long as he can.
So there are locks up
high because she can jump
like a little spider monkey.
At 90 years old, she can
jump and unlock things.
Incredible physical health, but
the cognitive function is gone.
And one thing I've noticed
about her that I hadn't read
about anywhere, but I haven't
studied the subject like you
have, is that when I would
come in, for example,
she doesn't know my name or who
I am, my identity any longer,
but her field knows my energy.
And there is this
comfort and safety
she experiences around
me and other people
that she's comfortable
with that goes
beyond any cognitive
recognition.
And I wanted to bring
this up because it's never
talked about.
And I only noticed it recently.
I thought, what is it?
And I thought, ah,
she can't remember me,
but she can feel me.
And she feels safe and
comfortable around me.
And when I get ready to
say goodbye and leave,
she starts to
panic a little bit.
Even though she
doesn't know who I am,
you know, trying to reach out.
She doesn't want me to go
because she feels safe.
And so I think it's
important for us to--
someone could make
a study of that one.
But it's important to
remember, even if the memory
is not there, the familiarity
of people may well be there.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And that
connection may well still
be there, even when
it's reached it's,
kind of, final-- till
the final stages, really.
>>LUGAVERE: Yeah.
I mean, dementia's
a rough disease.
And you know, one
of my colleagues
who is a Alzheimer's prevention
researcher and neurologist,
he has this saying that he uses
that couldn't be more accurate.
Once you've seen one
case of dementia,
you've seen one
case of dementia.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: It's so
different for everybody.
>>REGINA: For every person.
>>LUGAVERE: And that
said, there's overlapping.
No matter what the
diagnosis is, there's
overlapping pathologies
with all of them.
I mean, there's
this amyloid plaque,
which is so common in
Alzheimer's disease.
It's one of the
defining features,
actually, of
Alzheimer's disease.
But it's also present in
people that are not demented.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: And it's present in
Parkinson's disease, as well.
>>REGINA: And they
don't understand
Parkinson's at all yet.
>>LUGAVERE: Exactly
So my focus really,
even though my mom was never
diagnosed with Alzheimer's
disease, I focused on
Alzheimer's disease
because it's the disease for
which the most research is
available.
>>REGINA: How's she doing now?
>>LUGAVERE: I mean,
she's doing all right.
But I don't want
to sugarcoat it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LUGAVERE: It's horrible.
And every second that
I spend with her--
>>REGINA: Are you
having influence
on her diet and everything?
>>LUGAVERE: Well you know, I
try, but I'm not her caretaker.
>>REGINA: Right.
Gotcha.
>>LUGAVERE: And you
know, people that
develop Alzheimer's disease,
actually, their food
preferences change.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LUGAVERE: They
develop a sweet tooth.
>>REGINA: My step
mom lives on sugar.
>>LUGAVERE: Mm hm.
And why might that be?
>>REGINA: It makes it worse.
>>LUGAVERE: It might be
because the brain is really
crying out for energy.
>>REGINA: Energy.
>>LUGAVERE: And
it only knows how
to use glucose at such
an advanced stage, right.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>LUGAVERE: But the ability
of the brain to use ketones,
which we talked about
before, is undeterred
by aging, by Alzheimer's
disease, and by genes.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LUGAVERE: So actually, whereas
I think somebody who already
has developed dementia, it might
be really difficult to put them
on a ketogenic diet.
That's where I think the
application for something
like MCT oil may be
potentially useful because MCT
oil, basically,
allows your brain
to access ketones without
needing to be on a very
low carbohydrate diet.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
Well I wish you luck on that
journey, the personal journey,
and I wish you well in informing
your generation, my generation,
and everyone in between through
your own passion in this work.
Good job.
>>LUGAVERE: Thank you so much.
>>REGINA: Can't wait to see
it when the book finally
comes out.
>>LUGAVERE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Again, the name
of the book, Genius Foods,
is available at
major booksellers.
Also, keep an eye out for
the documentary, Bread Head.
Max's website will keep you up
on everything. maxlugavere.com.
Meanwhile, you might
also enjoy my interview
with Jack Cruz and
Dominic D'agostino
here in the Gaia archives.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]